Caffeine - The Habit-Forming Compiler
=====================================

A compiler for Habit, if it were a pure, call-by-value language.

Building
========

Caffeine can be built with cabal. It depends on the habit-front
package being installed first.

Compiling
=========

After "cabal build" is run, the executable "x86-compiler" will be
found in the dist/build/x86-compiler directory. This program will
compile Habit programs. runtime.c must be in the current working
directory for compilation to succeed. All Habit programs must import
Prelude. Prelude.hs must be in the same directory as the source file,
and should be compiled first. Executables will be placed in the
current working directory.

Example:

> dist\build\x86-compiler\x86-compiler.exe tests\Prelude.hs

... output ...

> dist\build\x86-compiler\x86-compiler.exe tests\Map.hs

... output ...

> Map.exe

... Map program output ...

Directories
===========

  Habit\Compiler\Register -- Compiles Habit to an intermediate
language targeting a register machine. 

  Habit\Compiler\Stack -- No longer supported; Compiled Habit to an
intermediate language targeting a stack machine. 

  Habit\Compiler\X86 -- Compiles the intermediate language from the
register machine to x86 assembly code, suitable for the GAS/GCC
toolchain. 

  tests\ -- Contains a variety of test programs.

  ifaces\ -- Holds intermediate files produced by the front-end,
  register-compiler and x86-compiler.

Executables
===========

  * register-compiler -- Compiles a Habit program to the register
intermediate language. Results are written to the ifaces\ directory.

  * register-interpreter -- Executes a file containing register
machine intermediate code. Can execute a program compiled by
register-compiler.

  * x86-compiler -- Compiles a Habit program to x86
assembler. Assembly file are written to the ifaces\ directory. The
compiled executable is written to the current directory. The file
"runtime.c" must be present in the current directory for the compiler
to work.

Tests
=====

The top-level directory contains Test.hs, which can be compiled with
"ghc --make". It tests the interpreter against several programs in the
tests/ directory. Only the register interpreter is used for testing -
executables are not currently tested.